Create a simple website Home Create a simple website Like this one Mitanshu Sukhwani 2025-06-07 To create a simple (and free) website we will be using Github Pages . The following assumptions are made: You have working knowledge of git . You have a GitHub account. You are more comfortable with Markdown than HTML . Steps Follow the steps on GitHub
Pages to have a initial functional website. Install pandoc from here for your operating
system. Pandoc helps converting Markdown to HTML, the languge of choice
for www. In your git repository (better to clone and work locally) username.github.io , make two folders, one titled markdown to store markdown files and another titled html to store html. Create a blog post in the markdown folder with title post_title.md . In the top of the post_title.md , create a YAML front
matter with the following fields: --- # 1. Basic Identification title : Post Title subtitle : Post Subtitle author : Your Name date : YYYY-MM-DD lang : en # 2. Metadata / SEO description : Post Description keywords : [ keyword1 , keyword2 , keyword3 ] --- to make the blog post SEO friendly. You may skip adding keywords if
you don’t have any. It is safer to add "" around the values
of title , subtitle , author , and description fields. Convert the Markdown blog post to HTML using pandoc (execute in
the repo folder): pandoc --standalone --output html/post_title.html markdown/post_title.md Create an index.md file in markdown folder. Create the index by hyperlinking the posts: 1. [ Post Title ](html/post_title.html) Convert index.md to HTML using pandoc (execute in
the repo folder): pandoc --standalone --output index.html markdown/index.md You need to create the index file at the root of your repository.
Since GitHub does now allow you to host the site from folder titled
other than docs trivially. Commit, push, wait a bit, and see your website live! You can check the quality of your website on PageSpeed Insights . See this
report for mitanshu7.github.io . Have a look at GitHub
Pages documentation too. Bonus! I have created a python script to convert all markdown files to html
to ease the process. The script also uses html/template.html to add Back to Home links on
the bottom of every page. Please visit mitanshu7/mitanshu7.github.io ! Honorary mention Hugo is one of the most popular
open-source static site generators. Checkout their Quick start and Host and deploy page for a similar setup as above. It also comes with a plethora of Themes . Back to Home